with internet service providers in
dozens of countries around the world
advertising gigabit or even faster
internet service it's awfully tempting
to yell shut up and take my money and
then bathe yourself in a waterfall of
dank mes but before you spend even more
of your hard-earned dollars upgrading an
already too expensive internet plan
there's a lot you need to consider first
of all how is that connection even
getting to your PC or other devices is
it going to be a bottleneck well for
most people the answer to that question
is by using the ISP provided router now
if that happens to be in the same room
or you're lucky enough to have ethernet
in your walls great any reasonably
modern device except Smart TVs for some
reason should have a gigabit Ethernet
port meaning you will get the full
benefit and even if you weren't so lucky
as all that modern powerline network
adapters and even Wi-Fi can handle
gigabit or more however everything that
I just said comes with some big big
butts let's start with the most common
connection today Wi-Fi if you happened
to buy yourself a premium Wi-Fi router
or access point in the last 20 minutes
or so well congratulations 1center
you're ready to download at gigabit
speeds sort of more on that later for
everyone else who grabbed a $15 USB
Wi-Fi dongle and called it a day well
I've got some bad news advertised Wi-Fi
speeds are a pipe dream specifically
this kind of pipe dream I mean sure with
enough spatial streams your pre-plague
Wi-Fi 5 setup could hit gigabit in the
real world but between your walls cats
and just plain old distance you'd be
lucky to get half of that leaving the
rest of your tasty megabits untouched
now the justification for these
advertised speeds is that with multiple
concurrent users all downloading at the
same time the total might add up to
something approaching that number but
that also assumes that you have a bunch
of people who are downloading at the
same time and that your router and your
devices have implemented optional parts
of the Wi-Fi spec that spoiler alert
they often didn't Oh and before I spoil
that too our sponsor is Ridge they're
celebrating their 11th anniversary right
now why don't you join them there might
be cake virtual cake in the form of
savings head over to the link below
bring your party hat and check out the
sale everything I just said about Wi-Fi
applies equally to power line and mocha
if you're on anything but the latest
version of the tech under optimal
conditions it is unlikely that you need
a gigabit pipe to keep them fed
but let's say for the sake of argument
you have overcome those problems let's
meet potential bottleneck number two
your computer whether your computer
looks like this or this or this or this
the data that reaches your network
adapter still needs to be processed and
sometimes stored now as long as you have
a solid state drive the storage part is
probably fine gigabit or 1,000 megabit
is just 125 megabytes per second it's
not that much in the grand scheme of
things so then why is the processing an
issue well you you see data hosts and
internet service providers greatly
prefer that the files you download are
compressed this helps them save on
storage space and helps them save on
bandwidth costs as your juicy memes
movies and games come flying over the
wire the downside of all of this is that
someone needs to uncompress them that's
you which is why downloading games from
Steam has turned into kind of an
informal Benchmark around here because
it turns out to max out a gigabit line
in Steam you need a pretty modern CPU to
max out 2 and 1/2 gig you pretty much
need a top-of-the-line gaming chip and
to even approach the limits of the 10
gig connection that we have to our
on-site steam cache we need a
$10,000 996 core thread Ripper Pro now
as you can imagine most people's PCS and
especially game consoles aren't equipped
with any of that stuff I mean even the
PS5 and Xbox series X struggle to reach
full gigabit speeds for game downloads
and as for the Nintendo switch well it's
in a class of its own the uh less
advanced class struggling to reach real
world speeds of even just 100 megabit
which was the standard on PCS so I don't
know 25 years ago now there are valid
use cases for fat download speeds and we
will talk about those but first let's
change gears to what most people are
actually doing with their internet
connection most of the time and it isn't
playing that game it's playing other
games now obviously every game's a
little different but but we spent 10
minutes in rocket league and Halo
infinite moving about 6 megab and 15
megabytes of data respectively that
doesn't mean you're going to be able to
get by with a25 megabit connection your
voice chat uh might not be too happy
about that but what it does mean is that
a 200 to 300 megabit connection is lots
for even a Full House of active Gamers
especially now that steam allows local
transfers of game files however that
doesn't mean that just any connection
will do because any gamer will tell you
once you've got enough bandwidth latency
is the real difference between pone or
be pwned and it can be worthwhile to
test drive any available local isps to
see who Nets you the lowest ping times
to your favorite game servers the same
actually goes for streaming games from a
service like GeForce now or Xbox Cloud
depending on the resolution and frame
rate that you target they call for
anywhere from 10 to 45 megabit now game
streaming is a unique past because even
a tiny disruption can spell disaster so
while I wouldn't say you need gigabit I
would probably double or even triple the
onp paper requirements just to ensure
that my little sister's book report
doesn't get my squad wiped out but the
same is not true of Netflix and other
video streaming services which is
actually kind of funny when you consider
how much 4K video streaming gets talked
about in ISP marketing materials we're
talking Max 50 megabit per stream and it
pre-buff in chunks for smoother playback
kind of like your old old disman with
anti-ip so yeah the faster your
connection the quicker you'll be able to
scrub within your content since those
chunks will come down so fast but even
then there's a point of diminishing
returns and past a few hundred megabit
Netflix's own servers are unlikely to
send you the data any faster which
brings us to the third big bottleneck
for data to transfer from one place to
another well it's going to have to be
received by you but also sent by someone
else at the same speed and how many
businesses do you know that like
spending extra money on an Overkill
connection that most people won't
benefit from that's right guys the vast
majority of the services that you use
are going to be throttled on their side
rather than on yours well okay liners
put on a turbo tabbing browsing social
media consumption machine I'm going to
use all the sites at once neat do you
want the bad news first uh here let's
load up say LT store.com ooh cable
management and precision screwdrivers
coming soon sign up for a notification
anyway I was going somewhere with this
that sort of traffic page loads small
pictures videos is made up of a whole
bunch of smallish requests and resource
files that are so small that they
typically finish downloading before they
even get up to gigabit speed you can use
the network tab of your browser's Dev
tools to reveal what exactly is going on
behind the scenes when you visit a web
page just click through to review your
timing details and you can see exactly
what's taking up time and potentially
slowing down your experience it turns
out a lot of the time it's actually not
the data transfer speed at all your
isp's default DNS needs to give you the
IP address of a server before you can
connect and in many cases this takes
dozens of milliseconds meaning that most
of the time you spend waiting that
hyperfast connection was sitting idle
anyway compounding the problem you also
need to wait for the remote server to
process your request and begin the
transfer more idling the good news is
that switching to a public DNS provider
like Cloud flare Open DNS or Google can
improve this performance in fact we did
a whole video about it and Gibson
research offers a DNS Benchmark tool
that can help determine the best option
for your location we're going to have
that link down below the bad news is
that everything I just said is free and
a fancier connection does nothing to
improve it wait bad news that's not bad
news that's good news I like free stuff
oh wait here's the bad news what is this
analytics and
advertising okay if a website is doing
everything right those resources should
load after the content you actually care
about so they shouldn't impact your
experience too much if they're doing it
right in the real world though ads and
analytics can significantly impact your
browsing speed services like
browser-based ad blocking or a pie hoold
DNS resolver on your local network we
actually made a whole video about that
as well we'll have that link down below
can eliminate at least some of those
load times but as someone who relies on
web advertising for my livelihood and to
pay my staff how you guys doing good
last paycheck clear yep good stuff I
would only ask that you consider the
impact if you go that route now let's
talk about your butts but Linus I like
to download and share Linux isos well
first of all your community spirit and
commitment to open source is admirable
comrade but you should really be looking
into a seed box for as little as a
dollar a month you can get dedicated
space and bandwidth on a server in a
data center that has multiple high-speed
internet connections all away from the
prying eyes of your internet service
provider many of them even accept crypto
as payment because hey you know how much
they hate when people share Linux isos
but lonus I want to run a web server at
home okay again why virtual private
servers start even cheaper than
seedboxes and have the same benefits
along with static IPS easy backup
options and room to grow and scale if
you need more capacity in the future you
also won't be risking your residential
connection being terminated because
you're technically violating your isp's
terms of service you could even
collocate if you want dedicated Hardware
with a Raspberry Pi costing under 10
bucks a month which is probably less
than that internet upgrade that you've
been eyeing but lus I'm a content
creator and I need that sweet sweet
upload speed all right you've got me on
that one a proper fiber to the home ISP
offers symmetric speeds that is to say
that the upload speed is the same as the
download speed and I'll be the first to
admit that when you're uploading
multiple 4K videos every week that
higher upload speed and not having to
sit around and wait it's pretty amazing
but watch out not all fiber services are
equal and many isps Market their
services as fiber because I don't know
there's fiber somewhere but that last
mile connection from your home to the
nearest node is actually docis 3 or 3.1
and your upload speeds tend to be much
slower another thing to watch out for is
that we've never seen YouTube inest at
multi- gig speeds so you're probably
still okay with a decent but not maxed
out connection which is especially true
for Twitch in that case you only need
about 8 megabits per 10860 stream so
again real-time streaming I would build
in some additional buffer in that case
even like Forex if you don't want your
audience to be like Yay what happened
bottom line if you told 20-year-old lus
that he would one day be arguing against
faster internet speeds he would have
laughed in your face but things aren't
getting any more affordable out there
right now guys and if a reality check
here can save even 1% of the people who
watch this video just $10 a month that
would work out to over a million dollar
saved a year which is a pretty big win
in my book you know what else is in my
book this message from our sponsor
grammarly here at lus Media Group
there's a lot of communication needed to
get these videos out let me tell you
that's where grammarly steps in
grammarly is a secure AI partner that
help helps us write more clearly so we
can move forward with our work faster
getting your point across is essential
when you're working on a tight deadline
so you can rely on grammarly to help you
paraphrase your sentences to be concise
and more impactful short amount of space
we're busy people and Gramm Le's app
actions feature helps you keep your
workflow in motion no more toggling
between tabs just grab everything you
need in one place they've been around
for 14 years now that's nuts so you know
you can trust them when it comes to
keeping your data private and secure
sign up for an account and download for
free using our link grammarly.com
lt03 if you want to get access to extra
features get 20% off gramly premium if
you guys like this uh maybe you'd like
to watch Dan and Sean trying to clean up
the mess that Jake and I keep making of
our Network hey take can I help